<h1 align="center"> 📝 Table of Contents </h1>

+ [Chapter 1. Introducing Ansible](#chapter-1-introducing-ansible)
  + [What Is Ansible?](#what-is-ansible)
  + [Installing Ansible](#installing-ansible)
+ [Chapter 2. Implementing an Ansible Playbook](#chapter-2-implementing-an-ansible-playbook)
  + [Writing and Running Playbooks](#writing-and-running-playbooks)
    + [**Example of a playbook.**](#example-of-a-playbook)
    + [What the colors mean\*\*](#what-the-colors-mean)
  + [Implementing Multiple Plays](#implementing-multiple-plays)
  + [Chapter 3.  Managing Variables and Facts](#chapter-3--managing-variables-and-facts)


# Chapter 1. Introducing Ansible

## What Is Ansible?

Ansible is an open-source automation platform. It is a simple automation language that can accurately describe an IT application infrastructure in Ansible Playbooks. It is also an automation engine that runs Ansible Playbooks.

Ansible can manage powerful automation tasks and can adapt to many workflows and environments. At the same time, new users of Ansible can very quickly use it to become productive.

Ansible is agentless meaning nothing has to be installed on the servers it is interacting with. You only need a Master node which is referred to as the controller node. When setting up the infrastructure for this you will need two main things to at least get the ball rolling.

- A Inventory File
- A Config File.

## Installing Ansible
`Ansible-Core` - This is the barebones install of Ansible.

`Community Ansible` -  Comunity Supported Ansible

# Chapter 2. Implementing an Ansible Playbook

Playbooks depend on an inventory file to read from. Below are some examples of inventory files

```ini
[webservers]
web1.example.com
web2.example.com
192.0.2.42

[db-servers]
db1.example.com
db2.example.com

[east-datacenter]
web1.example.com
db1.example.com

[west-datacenter]
web2.example.com
db2.example.com

[production]
web1.example.com
web2.example.com
db1.example.com
db2.example.com

[development]
192.0.2.42
```

- This is an example of a nested group.

```ini
[usa]
washington1.example.com
washington2.example.com

[canada]
ontario01.example.com
ontario02.example.com

[north-america:children]
canada
usa
```

These are examples of basic inv files you can have many and just need to reference them in the playbooks.

## Writing and Running Playbooks

> [!TIP]
> **THINK DECLATRIVEY**

Something to note is that Ansible uses modules built on Python that are used in the playbooks. There is too much to cover here but if you would like to look into more about modules you can find them [here](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.9/user_guide/modules.html).

### **Example of a playbook.**

```yaml

- name: Ensure httpd is installed
  anasible.builtin.dnf:
    name: httpd
    state: present
```

This would install the Apache webserver if not installed already.

### What the colors mean**

`Green` -- Tasks were completed successfully, no changes were made though.

`Amber` -- Tasks were completed successfully, and changes were made.

## Implementing Multiple Plays

An Example of Implementing Multiple Plays would look something like this.

```yaml
---
# This is a simple playbook with two plays

- name: First play
  hosts: web.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: First task
      ansible.builtin.dnf:
        name: httpd
        state: present

    - name: Second task
      ansible.builtin.service:
        name: httpd
        enabled: true

- name: Second play
  hosts: database.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: First task
      ansible.builtin.service:
        name: mariadb
        enabled: true
```


## Chapter 3.  Managing Variables and Facts

When writting playboks it can be simplied by using variables.

An Example would be something like this

```yaml
vars:
  web_pkg: httpd
  web_port: 80
  ```
Then wwhen writting the variables you can call them using `"{{ web_pkg }}"`

Something useful to note is that Ansible using jinja to call its variables. You can break this down into host_vars and group_vars.

